Washington was born in a wealthy planter family among the colonial Virginia gentry. His education included surveying, which launched his early career as a surveyor. He joined the Virginia militia at age 20, fought in the French and Indian War, and rose to the rank of colonel. The Second Continental Congress made him commander-in-chief of the Continental Army in 1775. Washington's strategy, field command, and development of the army combined with a French alliance to defeat the British, who surrendered after the Siege of Yorktown. Washington’s devotion to American Republicanism impelled him to decline further power, and he resigned as commander-in-chief in 1783. He was unanimously chosen to lead the Constitutional Convention in 1787 which devised the new Federal government.
Washington was also unanimously elected as President by the Electoral College in the first two national elections. He then oversaw the creation and promotion of a strong, well-financed national government, and he suppressed a rebellion. He remained impartial in a fierce rivalry between two cabinet secretaries, Thomas Jefferson and Alexander Hamilton, though he adopted Hamilton's plans to pay federal and state debts, create a national bank, establish the seat of government, and implement a tax system. When the French Revolution plunged Europe into war, Washington assumed a policy of neutrality to protect American ships—although the Jay Treaty of 1795 created an alliance with Great Britain. Washington set precedents still in use today, such as the Cabinet system, the inaugural address, the title "Mr. President", and a two-term limit. His Farewell Address was a primer on civic virtue, warning of partisanship, sectionalism, and involvement in foreign wars.
Washington engaged and prospered in the slavetrade most of his life but eventually became troubled by its inhumanity. In his will, he directed the manumission of all 124 of his slaves, ultimately wishing to discourage the custom of slavery. Upon his death, he was famously eulogized for his patriotism as "first in war, first in peace, and first in the hearts of his countrymen". Scholarly and public polling ranks him among the top three Presidents in history, and he is honored by countless monuments, public works, place names, stamps, and currency.

